Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam's involvement in the Nuclear Power in India earned him the title "Missile Man of India". Due to his contribution, the government of India awarded him the highest civilian award. 

Let us tell you that Union Minister for Information and Broadcasting, Prakash Javadekar released the first look of the biopic of Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam in New Delhi on 9 February 2020. The title of the film is APJ Abdul Kalam: The Missile Man. It is a joint venture between Hollywood and Telugu film industry and will release by the end of 2020. 

Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam was born on 15 October 1931. His birth anniversary is observed as World Students' Day. He was the President of India from 2002 to 2007. He was honoured with several prestigious awards including India's highest civilian honour "Bharat Ratna" in 1997. He was born in Dhanushkodi, Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, and studied physics and aerospace engineering.

Name: Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam (Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam)

Nick Name: Missile Man

Nationality: Indian

Occupation: Engineer, Scientist, Author, Professor, Politician

Born: 15-Oct -1931

Place of Birth: Dhanushkodi, Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, India

Died: 27 July 2015

Died at the age of 83

Place of Death: Shillong, Meghalaya, India

Famous as: Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam President from 2002 to 2007

Preceded by: Kocheril Raman Narayanan (President from 1997-2002)

Succeeded by: Pratibha Patil (President from 2007-2012)    

He was the 11th president of India and elected against Lakshmi Sehgal in 2002. Before becoming the President of India, he worked with the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) as an aerospace engineer.

World Students’ Day 2020: Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam’s birthday: All you need to know

He was known as the Missile Man of India for his important role in the nation's civilian space programme and military missile development. Also, in 1998, he made significant contributions to India's Pokhran-II nuclear tests.

Do you know that A.P.J Abdul Kalam began his career as a scientist at the Aeronautical Development Establishment of the Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO)? He had also served as the project director of India's first Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV-III) at ISRO.

“FAILURE will never overtake me if my definition to SUCCEED is strong enough”.

In the 1990s he had served as the Chief Scientific Adviser to the Prime Minister before becoming the President of India in 2002. Now, let us study about Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam in detail through this article.

A.P.J Abdul Kalam: Family History and Early Life

APJ Abdul Kalam Family history and early life
Source: www.india.com

Dr. A.P.J Abdul Kalam was born on 15 October, 1931 to a Tamil Muslim family in Rameswaram, then in Madras Presidency in British India and now in Tamil Nadu. His father's name was Jainulabdeen, who was a boat owner and imam of a local mosque. His mother's name was Ashiamma, who was a housewife.

Abdul Kalam was the youngest of five siblings, the eldest was a sister, namely Asim Zohra and three elder brothers, namely Mohammed Muthu Meera Lebbai Maraikayar, Mustafa Kalam and Kasim Mohammed. He was close to his family and always helps them, though he remained the bachelor whole life.

His ancestors had been wealthy traders and landowners, with numerous properties and large tracts of land. They trade groceries between the mainland and the island to and from Srilanka and also ferrying the pilgrims from the mainland to the Pamban Island. So, their family got the title "Mara Kalam Iyakkivar" (wooden boat steerers) and later known as "Marakier."

But by 1920s, his family had lost most of his fortune; their businesses failed and by the time Abdul Kalam was born are in the stage of the poverty-stricken. To help the family, Kalam started selling newspapers at an early age.

In his school days, Kalam had average grades but was described as a bright and hardworking student who had a strong desire to learn. Mathematics was his main interest.

"Knowledge without action is useless and irrelevant. Knowledge with action converts adversity into prosperity." 
"Education gives you wings to fly. Achievement comes out of fire in our subconscious mind that ‘I will win."

He had completed his matriculation from Schwartz Higher Secondary School, Ramanathapuram and later he went to Saint Joseph's College where he became a physics graduate. In 1955, he went to Madras to study aerospace engineering at Madras Institute of Technology.

During his third year of graduation, he was assigned a project to design a low-level attack aircraft together with a few other students. Their teacher had given them a tight deadline for completing the project, it was very difficult. Kalam worked hard under immense pressure and finally completed his project within the stipulated deadline. The teacher was impressed by the dedication of Kalam.

As a result, Kalam wants to become a fighter pilot but he got 9th position in the qualifiers list and only eight positions were available in the IAF.

A.P.J Abdul Kalam: Education and Career

APJ Abdul Kalam Education and Carreer
Source: www.digtoknow.com

A.P.J Abdul Kalam had completed his graduation in 1957 from the Madras Institute of Technology and in 1958 as a scientist, he had joined the Aeronautical Development Establishment of the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO).

In the early 1960s, he worked with the Indian National Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR) under the renowned space scientist Vikram Sarabhai.

He had started his career by designing a small hovercraft at DRDO.

After visiting NASA's Langely Research Centre in Hampton, Virginia; Goddard Space Flight Centre in Greenbelt, Maryland and Wallops Flight Facility in 1963-64, he had started working on an expandable rocket project independently in 1965 at DRDO.

Amazing facts about Mahatma Gandhi

He was not much satisfied with his work at DRDO and when he received transfer orders to the ISRO in 1969 he became happy. There he served as the project director of the SLV-III which successfully deployed the Rohini satellite in near-earth orbit in July 1980. It is India's first indigenously designed and produced a satellite launch vehicle.

Kalam received the government's approval in 1969 and expanded the programme to include more engineers. In the 1970s, he had made an effort to develop the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) with an aim to allow India to launch its Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellite into Sun-Synchronous orbit, PSLV project was successful and on 20 September 1993, it was first launched.

APJ Abdul Kalam the Missile Man

Source: www. slideserve.com

"Dream is not that which you see while sleeping it is something that does not let you sleep." 

Raja Ramanna invited Abdul Kalam to witness the country's first nuclear test, Smiling Buddha, as the representative of TBRL, even though he had not participated in its development.

In the 1970s, Abdul Kalam directed two projects namely Project Devil and Project Valiant. Do you know about the Project Devil? It was an early liquid-fuelled missile project aimed at producing a short-range surface-to-air missile. This project was not successful and discontinued in the 1980s and later it led to the development of the Prithvi missile. On the other hand Project Valiant aimed at the development of intercontinental ballistic missile. This was also not successful.

An Indian Ministry of Defence programme managed by DRDO in partnership with other government organisations launched the Integrated Guided Missile Development programme (IGMDP) in the early 1980s. Abdul Kalam was asked to lead the project and in 1983 he returned to DRDO as Chief Executive of IGMDP in 1983.

The programme led to the development of four projects namely Short range surface-to-surface missile (Prithvi), Short range low-level surface-to-air missile (Trishul), Medium range surface-to-air missile (Akash) and Third-generation anti-tank missile (Nag).

"The world today is integrally connected through four rapid connectivities. They are the environment, people, economy, and ideas."

Under the leadership of Abdul Kalam, the project of IGMDP proved to be successful by producing missiles like the first Prithvi missile in 1988 and then the Agni missile in 1989. Due to his contribution, he was known as "Missile Man of India."

In 1992, he was appointed as the Scientific Adviser to the Defence Minister. With the rank of a cabinet minister, in 1999, he was appointed as the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India.

